<!DOCTYPE html>
<html lang="en-us">
  <head>
    <meta charset="UTF-8">
    <title>CS109 Hot Hand</title>
    <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1">
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="stylesheets/normalize.css" media="screen">
    <link href='https://fonts.googleapis.com/css?family=Open+Sans:400,700' rel='stylesheet' type='text/css'>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="stylesheets/stylesheet.css" media="screen">
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="stylesheets/github-light.css" media="screen">
  </head>
  <body>
    <section class="page-header">
    <div>
      <h1 class="project-name">CS109 Hot Hand Final Project </h1>
      <h2 class="project-tagline">Anthony Chen, Anthony Hou, Katherine Loboda, and Samuel Stone</h2>
      </div>
    </section>
    
    <section class = "page-header-2"> 
    <center>
    	<a href="https://samstone18.github.io/CS109HotHand/index" class="navbtn">Overview</a>
    	<a href="https://samstone18.github.io/CS109HotHand/data" class="navbtn">Data Collection, Cleaning, and Exploration </a>
    	<a href="https://samstone18.github.io/CS109HotHand/features" class="navbtn">Feature Selection </a>
    	<a href="https://samstone18.github.io/CS109HotHand/defining" class="navbtn">Defining Streak</a>
    	<a href="https://samstone18.github.io/CS109HotHand/models" class="navbtn">Modeling: Streak Impact </a>
    	<a href="https://samstone18.github.io/CS109HotHand/conclusions" class="navbtn">Discussion and Conclusions </a>
    </center>
    </section> 

    <section class="main-content">
      <center>
      <h1> <p> Background </h1>
	  </center>
	  <center> <h2> Motivation </h2> </center>
	  
	  <p> As technology and the ability to analyze increasingly large datasets 
	  improves drastically with each passing year, statisticians have become very interested in 
	  the large datasets generated by the world of sports, consisting of millions of datapoints summarizing nearly every second 
	  of a matchup between two teams. </p>
	  
	  <p> In the high-stakes world of the NBA, in particular, the difference between a player making or missing a key shot
	  can determine the fate of an entire team and lead to billion-dollar implications, whether in terms of team salary or profitability
	  or in the underground world of sports betting. Accordingly, a substantial amount of research, both by league affiliates and outside
	  academics, has focused on predicting player or team outcomes based on various metrics. </p>
	  
	  <p> One particularly interesting topic researchers have explored is the idea of the "Hot Hand", or the belief that once players hit 
	  a few consecutive shots, they somehow become more confident in their abilities and continue to hit subsequent difficult shots with ease. 
	  If this is truly the case, the implications for understanding the game of basketball are clear, but the theory could also shed light on
	  the psychological underpinnings of gamblers who believe wins tend to come in bunches or stock market traders who believe in streakiness
	  in other contexts.
	   
	  <p> Whether players can truly "get hot" in a way that significantly affects their shooting percentage
	  may also significantly impact the behavior of players on the court, which would give the hot hand real implications 
	  even if the underlying belief in streakiness was misguided. In other words, if players believe streakiness has real effects
	  and play in accordance with these beliefs, the mere idea of "heating up" can change the course of a basketball game.  </p>
	  
	  <p> Throughout our project, we had one fundamental goal: to determine whether we see evidence that the "Hot Hand" is real or 
	  whether it is an overblown fallacy. Therefore, our focus was on determining which variables contribute to results on the court 
	  and whether players' "heat" was an important predictor or not. 
	  
	  <center> <h2> Literature Review </h2> </center>
	  
	  <p> Thomas Gilovich’s seminal <a href = "http://wexler.free.fr/library/files/gilovich%20(1985)%20the%20hot%20hand%20in%20basketball.%20on%20the%20misperception%20of%20random%20sequences.pdf"> 
	  1985 paper </a> “The hot hand in basketball” opened this debate by suggesting that popular belief in the hot 
	  hand is misguided cognitive illusion that arises from the same misconceptions surrounding probability that lead individuals to believe 
	  that a coin that lands on tails several times in a row must be biased. </p>
	  
	  <p> More recent analyses of the hot hand, however, suggest that the reality may be more complicated. In 2014, “The Hot Hand: A New Approach 
	  to an Old Fallacy” 
	  <a href = "http://www.sloansportsconference.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/02/2014_SSAC_The-Hot-Hand-A-New-Approach.pdf"> 
	  debuted </a> at the MIT Sloan Sports Analytics Conference as a response to Gilovich’s work. The authors of the paper concluded
	  that while Gilovich’s analysis was not without merit, a proper understanding of the hot hand is “contingent on defining ‘hot’ correctly.” 
	  The authors believed that because Gilovich’s analysis did not properly control for the difficulty of various types of shots, his analysis 
	  was incomplete. When they then controlled for shot difficulty, they determined that streaks of made shots were statistically significant 
	  predictors of future success, suggesting that the hot hand may actually be valid. </p>

	  <p> Based on the literature, we knew that one of our key goals for the project was to understand how to properly define "heat" in a way
	  that was both intuitive, in terms of how the sport of basketball is actually played, but also backed by solid statistical reasoning and 
	  empirical results. We ultimately considered six different streak metrics, and just like the debate between scholars about the phenomenon, 
	  our results varied substantially depending on how we define streak. </p>
	  
	  <center> <h2> Wrapping Up and Next Steps </h2> </center>
	  
	  <p> Confident in our understanding of the debate surrounding the "Hot Hand", 
	  we turned to our dataset and <a href = "https://samstone18.github.io/CS109HotHand/data"> 
	  began cleaning and exploring our data </a> so we could start the process of coming to our own conclusions on the debate. </p> 
      
      <footer class="site-footer">
      </footer>

    </section>

  
  </body>
</html>
